The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hermit of Mars, by Stephen Bartholomew

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Hermit of Mars

Author: Stephen Bartholomew

Illustrator: Virgil Finlay

Release Date: September 14, 2016 [EBook #53048]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HERMIT OF MARS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                          THE HERMIT OF MARS

                        BY STEPHEN BARTHOLOMEW

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                    Worlds of Tomorrow October 1963
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




                       He was the oldest man on
                    Mars ... in fact, the only one!


When Martin Devere was 23 and still working on his Master's, he was
hurt by a woman. It was then that he decided that the only things
that were worthwhile in life were pure art and pure science. That, of
course, is another story, but it may explain why he chose to become an
archeologist in the first place.

Now he was the oldest human being on Mars. He was 91. For many years,
in fact, he had been the _only_ human being on Mars. Up until today.

He looked through the transparent wall of his pressurized igloo at the
puff of dust in the desert where the second rocket had come down. Earth
and Mars were just past conjunction, and the regular automatic supply
rocket had landed two days ago. As usual, Martin Devere, taking his
own good time about it, had unloaded the supplies, keeping the things
he really needed and throwing away the useless stuff like the latest
microfilmed newspapers and magazines, the taped TV shows and concerts.
As payment for his groceries he had then reloaded the rocket with the
written reports he had accumulated since the last conjunction, plus a
few artifacts.

Then he had pushed a button and sent the rocket on its way again, back
to Earth. He didn't mind writing the reports. Most of them were rubbish
anyway, but they seemed to keep the people back at the Institute happy.
He did mind the artifacts. It seemed wrong to remove them, though he
sent only the less valuable ones back. But perhaps it couldn't be
helped. One time, the supply rocket had failed to return when he pushed
its red button--the thing was still sitting out there in the desert,
slowly rusting. Martin Devere had happily unloaded the artifacts and
put them back where they belonged. It wasn't his fault.

The puff of dust on the horizon was beginning to settle. This second
rocket had descended with a shrill scream through the thin air, its
voice more highly pitched than it would have been in denser atmosphere.
Martin Devere had looked up from his work in time to see its braking
jets vanish behind the low Martian hills a few kilometers distant.

It was much too large to be an automatic supply rocket, even if there
had been reason to expect another one. Martin Devere knew it could mean
only one thing--someone was paying him an unannounced visit.

He waited, watching through the igloo wall to see who had come to poke
around and bother him after all these years.

At first he was annoyed that the people at the Institute hadn't let him
know visitors were coming. Then he reminded himself that it had been
years since he'd taken the trouble to listen to his radio receiver, or
to read the messages they sent him along with supplies.

After a long time, he made out a smaller dust-puff, and then a little
sandcat advancing slowly across the desert. Riding on top of it were
two men in space suits.

       *       *       *       *       *

Everyone on Earth who reads popular magazines or watches TV knows the
story of Martin Devere, "The Hermit of Mars." Over the years, now that
he is dead, he has become a sort of culture hero, as Dr. Livingston or
Albert Schweitzer once were. Though Martin Devere could not be called
a humanitarian in any sense of the word. After his divorce from his
first and only wife, at the age of 45, he never gave much thought again
either to women or any other kind of people--except for his long-dead
Martians.

But everyone should know by now how Martin Devere first came to Mars
at the age of 50. Even then he was the oldest man on the planet,
and Mars sustained quite a large research colony at the time. Only
Martin Devere's unchallenged scientific reputation, together with his
apparent good health, enabled him to leave Earth as head of a five-man
archeological team. This turned up the first fossil ruins far beneath
the desert sand.

Then there came a day when the Space Institute of the United
Governments decided to abandon Project Mars. It was getting too
expensive to maintain. Everything of value to space research had
already been learned about the planet, and the archeological site,
though yet barely scratched, did not properly come under space
research. Closing Project Mars would mean more funds for solar
research, on Mercury, for the Lunar colony and for work on the
interstellar drive.

So the hundred-odd inhabitants of the Project received orders to leave
the igloos and other equipment behind and come back to Earth.

Martin Devere, however, had been on Mars for three years now. When the
Project physician gave him his routine exam, it was discovered that a
valve in Martin Devere's aorta had developed a faint flutter. Nothing
too serious, really. But enough to greatly reduce his chances of
surviving another rocket lift-off.

Martin Devere smiled at the news and volunteered to remain behind,
alone on Mars. Under the circumstances, the Institute was forced to
agree.

On the day that the strange rocket came down behind the desert hills,
Martin Devere had been on Mars for a total of 38 years. For the past 35
of them he had been The Hermit--and quite happy about it....

The little sandcat was getting closer. Martin Devere smiled to himself,
watching the two men in their clumsy space gear. It was high noon, and
a nice comfortable ten degrees centigrade outside. If the two newcomers
thought they needed full spacesuits to get around out there, Martin
Devere wasn't going to tell them any different. Actually, though the
atmospheric pressure was about the same as at the top of Mount Everest,
on a beautiful day like this a man could get along easily outdoors with
nothing more than an oxygen mask. But let them clomp around in their
rubberized long-johns if they wanted to.

In a few minutes they would be coming in through the igloo's airlock.
Martin Devere turned away, scowling now. He hoped the Institute hadn't
decided to reopen Mars Project. There was plenty of room in all these
igloos and connecting tunnels that had been left behind, but with a new
expedition here it might get pretty crowded. Mainly, Devere didn't want
a bunch of amateurs poking around his diggings, breaking things.

His thumb rubbed slowly across the long stubble on his chin. He
wondered if he had made some slip in that last report, or in some of
the pictures of the ruins he'd sent back. He'd rather the Institute
didn't find out about those fossilized machines he'd dug up. He didn't
understand the gadgets himself, but some of the people at the Institute
just might decide they were interesting enough to be worth sending up
an expert.

The Institute, Devere knew, was interested in machinery, not art
objects.

       *       *       *       *       *

One of the men held an automatic pistol pointed at Martin Devere while
the other was stripping off his space gear. Then the pistol changed
hands while the first man removed his own suit. Martin Devere could
have told them that he wasn't afraid of the gun. He didn't actually
care much, one way or the other: let them point it if it made them
happy. Martin Devere figured that he had already lived a lot longer,
here in this feeble gravity and germ-free, oxygen-rich air, than his
tricky heart would have allowed him on Earth. Let them point the gun if
they wanted to.

"If you make one move toward the radio transmitter I'll blow your head
off," the taller man said. He had black wavy hair that hung over his
brow. The other man was completely bald.

"I don't even know if the radio works," Martin Devere answered. "I
haven't turned it on in years. I should warn you, though, that if you
shoot that thing inside the igloo here, it will puncture the plastic
wall and let all the air out. I always keep the pressure up high
indoors so I can boil water for coffee."

The tall man frowned in confusion and blinked at the weapon in his
hand. Then he stared at the transparent dome above him, as if realizing
for the first time that only a thin bubble of plastic separated him
from near-vacuum, now that he had removed his suit.

"I was just making some coffee when you showed up," Martin Devere said,
turning away. "Have some? I'm afraid it's instant. I've given up trying
to get the Institute to send me a can of real coffee in the rocket.
They think I need canned TV shows more."

"He's harmless," the bald man said. "You can see he's just an old
senile nut. Leave him be, we've work to do."

The tall man lowered his weapon, then let it fall into the holster at
his hip.

"No big hurry. I think I'd like some of that coffee first. Say, Pop,
how about cooking us a meal in a couple of hours?"

Martin Devere was spooning brown powder into three cups.

"Sure thing. What would you like--beans and franks, or franks and
beans?"

       *       *       *       *       *

"I suppose you wonder what we're doing, Pop?" The tall man held the
disassembled pieces of his gun in his lap. He was carefully polishing
each part with a chemically treated cloth.

It was three days since they had landed, and the tall metal skeleton
was beginning to take shape out in the desert. At the moment, the
bald man was out alone, testing circuits. Usually the two went out
together--they had apparently decided it was safe to leave Martin
Devere unguarded, though they had smashed his radio transmitter just in
case.

The two men worked steadily during the daylight hours, came back at
sunset to eat and sleep, then went out again at dawn. The towering
lacework of steel was growing like an ugly flower.

The tall man held the trigger assembly of his gun up to the light.
He turned it slowly between his thumb and forefinger. It cast an odd
crescent-shaped shadow over the muscles of his jaw.

"No, I don't wonder what you're doing," Martin Devere answered. He was
sitting at his workbench, crouched over an ancient metal plate as thin
as paper.

The tall man began to put his weapon back together again. He snapped
the trigger assembly into the receiver. He pulled the hammer back and
then released it; it made a sharp, hard click.

"Not even curious, Pop? Okay, then tell me what _you're_ doing. What's
that piece of tinfoil you've been staring at the past two hours?"

Martin Devere straightened and turned to look at the other.

"It's an ancient Martian scroll. It's nearly a million years old. I
found it in a new pit I've been digging, five hundred meters down. It's
the longest and perhaps most important bit of Martian writing I've
found so far."

"Yeah? What's it have to say?"

Martin Devere shook his head. "Their language, their whole frame of
reference, was fundamentally different from ours. It's something like
higher mathematics, you'd have to learn the language to understand it.
But I suppose you might say that this is a poem.... Yes, an epic poem."

The tall man laughed. He shoved an ammunition clip into his weapon,
pumped a round into the chamber, slipped the gun back into its holster.
He got up and began pacing the floor of the igloo. The floor was
cluttered with dozens of artifacts.

He stopped and nudged one specimen with his toe.

"What's this thing, Pop? An ancient Martian meatgrinder?"

"I hardly think so. They were vegetarians." He squinted at the object.
"I'm afraid I have no idea what it is. It's some sort of machine, but
I'm no engineer, I can't imagine what its function was. They--don't
build many machines, you know."

The man with the gun turned to stare at Martin Devere.

"You mean _didn't_ build, don't you?"

"Yes, of course.... Past tense." And Devere turned again to peer at the
million-year-old poem before him.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Damn it to hell. This might hold us up a week." The bald man flung the
shatterproof helmet of his suit against the igloo wall. His tone of
voice was matter-of-fact emotionless. Even the way he threw the helmet
betrayed no real emotion. Still wearing the rest of his suit he sat
down at Martin Devere's work bench and clenched his fists. His face was
smooth, blank.

"What's the matter?" His partner put down some drawings and came over.

"The modulator circuit doesn't check out. I'll have to take the whole
works apart and start over again." The bald man spoke--when he did
speak--with a faint accent that Martin Devere could not identify.

"It doesn't matter." The other rubbed at his chin. "We're still ahead
of our schedule."

"Hey. Old man." The bald man pointed at Devere. "You have anything to
drink in this cave of yours?"

Martin Devere frowned, thinking. He remembered a bottle he'd been
saving for some special occasion--he couldn't recall what, just now.

"I think I have some bourbon," he said at last. "If I can find it."

"Find it. Mine straight, on the rocks."

When Martin Devere returned awhile later, the bald man was still
wearing his helmetless space suit. He and his friend were studying a
complex wiring diagram spread out on the work bench.

Martin Devere put two plastic cups down on the bench and poured them
full. Neither of the men looked up from their diagram until he had set
the bottle down.

"Pour one for yourself, Pop," the tall man said.

"Thanks. Don't mind if I do." Devere went to get another cup. Over his
shoulder he said, "Hope you boys don't mind crushed ice instead of
cubes. I just set a bucket of water in one of the unheated tunnels for
a couple minutes. Then I hit it with a hammer."

It was four hours past sunset, the temperature outside was far below
freezing.

"One thing you don't need on Mars is a refrigerator!" Pouring himself
a drink, the old man suddenly laughed. It was a brief, senile giggle,
that made the tall man turn to stare at him.

"Could be uncomfortable, though, if you were ever stuck out there at
night." Martin Devere's face was sober once more as he lifted his
cup and looked deeply into it. All trace of senility had vanished as
suddenly as it had appeared. "Like, say, if you were out there long
enough for your suit power to go dead. You'd freeze to a hunk of ice
in a few minutes.... Me, I never go outside at night."

"Shut up," the bald man said.

       *       *       *       *       *

All day the bald man had been out alone, working on his electronic
circuits. Evidently this left his partner nothing to do except study
schematics.

Now Martin Devere was aware that his guest had been staring at him for
several minutes without speaking. Martin Devere went on polishing the
green crystal vase he held in his hand. The vase looked ordinary at
first glance, until you noticed that it wasn't quite symmetrical. There
was a studied and careful asymmetry about its form, barely discernible,
that would disturb you the more you looked at it--until you knew
suddenly that no human brain could have created that shape.

The polishing cloth moved rhythmically across the vase's curving
surfaces. The green crystal reflected light in a way that made you
begin to think about boundless seas of water.

"I'll be glad when this job is over with," the tall man said, half
aloud.

"When it is, will you go away?" Martin Devere turned the vase slowly in
his hands.

"Not for a while yet, Pop." The man with the gun on his hip got to his
feet and stretched.

"I don't mind telling you what it's all about, Pop. You're all
right. It's simple. My partner and I were sent here by a certain
national power that doesn't like being told how to run its own
affairs by the United Governments. We're striking the first blow for
Freedom. That thing we're putting together out there is a bomb. It
could--disable--most of Earth. It has a new kind of nuclear rocket
engine behind it that could carry it across 200 million miles in a few
hours.

"You get the idea, Pop? Here on Mars, they won't even find it. And if
they did, we could deliver the bomb before they got a missile halfway
across.... So I hope you won't mind if my partner and I stay a while,
Pop."

It was several seconds before Martin Devere answered. He set the
crystal vase carefully inside a case and regarded it a moment.

"As long as you don't go messing up my diggings or break any of the
artifacts, it's no business of mine."

"And what if I did, Pop?" The tall man walked closer to Martin Devere.
He stood over the old man, his shadow on him. His hand rested lightly
on the butt of his gun. "What if I were to take all your vases and
statues and pots and tablets and smash them to bits, one by one? What
would you do then?"

Martin Devere's eyes slowly closed and opened, he made no other move
for a minute. Then he got to his feet without looking at the other man.
He turned and began to move away, toward a tunnel door that led to the
diggings.

Probably the tall man thought that he had finally put the fear of God
into Martin Devere. But as he turned back to his pile of schematics he
heard the old man's whisper:

"You might regret it."

The man with the gun did not answer.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Tell us about it, Pop."

"Yes, why don't you tell us about it."

They meant Martin Devere's work. The two men had finished their own
job. The assembled bomb rested in the desert, silent but alive, like
some abnormal growth.

Because of sunspot activity they hadn't yet been able to radio their
employers on Earth. The bald man expected conditions to clear in two
or three days. When they did clear, he would signal, "The bird is
nesting." Then the nation he had mentioned would be ready to deliver
its ultimatum to the United Governments.

For the first time since landing on Mars, the two men were idle. They
were waiting. They looked as if they were willing to wait a long time
if necessary.

Meanwhile, Martin Devere's artifacts were the only amusements available.

Perhaps the old man knew they were making fun of him. But he seemed
to take their question seriously. When he began to speak, they found
themselves listening.

"We don't know exactly what happened." Martin Devere faced the two
men across the cluttered workbench like a lecturer addressing his
students. He held in his hand a small bronze statue that might have
been a portrayal of one of the old Martian people or, just as likely,
some long-extinct animal. In the diffuse sunlight that came through
the igloo wall, it cast a shadow on the work bench that was even more
disturbingly alien in shape.

"No, we don't know what happened to them," the old man said. "The last
of them died nearly a million years ago, before the first Homo Sapiens
walked the Earth. From what we--I--have found we know a little about
what they were like. But we don't know why they died.

"We do know, for instance, that they never had much interest in
technology. Not that they lacked intelligence. They could build a
machine when it suited their purposes, whatever those may have been.
And I don't say they weren't interested in science. They had a highly
developed theoretical science, as sophisticated as their art. You might
say they were theoreticians. They were concerned with pure art and pure
science--but not with applied technology, or commercialized art.

"My own theory is that they had no need for technology. In the first
place, they were vegetarians, not carnivorous. So that their earliest
men had no need for hunting weapons--or other gadgets. Probably they
never developed the aggressive instincts which in humanity led to
warfare with its subsequent impetus to applied technology. The Martians
never got around to making cars or airplanes or bombs. They dedicated
themselves, gentlemen, to the contemplation of beauty.

"Then, nearly a million years ago, something happened to them. Perhaps
Mars began to lose her atmosphere then. Her oceans evaporated, the
air could no longer retain her heat at night, the farmlands parched
and froze. A few of the plant types were able to adapt and survive.
But within a few years, all animal life died out. One day, there were
suddenly no more Martians left."

Martin Devere's dry, withered hand caressed the small statue he held.

"Who knows? If they'd had time to develop space travel they might have
saved themselves. Then again, with a technology like yours, they might
have blown themselves up long before the natural catastrophe ..."

"What do you mean like _yours_?" the tall man said. "You mean like
_ours_, don't you?"

But Martin Devere turned away without answering.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Do you have another bottle of bourbon, old man?"

"No, I'm afraid not," Devere said. "There was only that one bottle."

"Too bad. We should have a little celebration." The bald man began
sealing himself into his spacesuit.

"I'll wait for you here," his partner said. "I'd better start burning
those plans."

Martin Devere looked up from the fragment of ceramic he was cleaning.

"You're going to send the message now?"

Neither of the men bothered to reply, since the answer was
self-evident. The bald man tested the air and power equipment of his
suit, then turned to his partner a moment before sealing his helmet.

"You checked the sandcat's power supply?"

"Yes, but you'd better take another look at it. I think the battery's
leaking."

The bald man nodded and went out the airlock. Martin Devere watched in
silence as the other man began to gather up his diagrams and plans and
tie them into a neat bundle.

"I guess we can take it easy now, Pop. As soon as that telegram's sent
and I get this stuff burned, my partner and I are unemployed. Of course
we'll have to hang around a while longer in case they want us to shoot
off Baby out there, but there's nothing to that. In the meantime maybe
I can help you dig up some more of those old pots and statues."

Martin Devere seemed to be thinking. He watched as the tall man checked
to make sure he hadn't forgotten anything, then carried the bundle of
plans over to the electronic oven.

"_Baby._ You mean your bomb, out there. You think you might actually
shoot it off then."

"Oh, maybe, maybe not."

"Couldn't they fire it from Earth by radio?" Devere asked.

"Nope. Somebody might try jamming."

"Oh, I see...."

Martin Devere was silent again until the tall man opened the oven and
removed a bundle of gray ash. He dumped the ashes into a bucket and
began stirring them with his hand.

"Something else I was wondering about," Devere said. He began cleaning
the fragment of ceramic again, his hands working in a slow circular
motion.

"Supposing the United Governments find out where it--the bomb is. They
might send a missile to blow it up."

"Told you, Pop. Baby can out-run anything else that flies. Wouldn't do
them any good."

"Yes, yes.... Still, the missile would hit Mars, wouldn't it? I mean,
it would destroy all this--the igloos, my diggings ..."

The tall man gave a laugh.

"Don't worry so much, Pop. We'd have plenty of time to get in the ship
and clear out. We might even take you with us."

"Still ..." But the old man lapsed again into thought.

       *       *       *       *       *

An hour later, the short-range radio gave a shrill beep. The tall man
went over and flipped the _talk_ switch.

"Yeah?"

"Hello. Listen, I did something stupid."

Martin Devere looked up at the sound of the bald man's voice. Devere's
hands still held the piece of ceramic. He had polished it until a
complex geometric design was visible, etched in reds and blues. It
might have been equally a decoration or some mechanical diagram.

"Did you get the message sent?" the tall man asked.

"Yes, that part's all right. I got to the ship and contacted
headquarters. I think they're going to deliver the ultimatum right
away. Now we just wait for orders. The only thing is, the sandcat's
power went dead on me while I was halfway down a hill. It started to
roll, and I forgot I was wearing a spacesuit. I jumped out. This low
gravity fooled me too. I think I've broken my ankle, it hurts like
hell."

The tall man cursed in a low voice.

"All right, all right," he said after a moment. "Just take it easy.
I'll have to come out and get you."

"I think the sandcat is all right. Stupid of me to jump like that,
wasn't thinking. Better bring a spare battery with you.... Oh, and
you'd better bring a light too. It will be getting dark in another half
hour."

"Okay, just wait for me. I'll home in on your suit radio."

The tall man switched off the receiver and went to his own suit locker.
Martin Devere watched as he removed the holster and weapon from his
hip. He pulled the heavy plastic trousers over his denim jumper and
then buckled the gun back again before starting on the rest of the
spacesuit.

"Nothing serious, I hope?" Martin Devere put the ceramic down carefully
and picked up another object from a stack of artifacts.

"You heard, didn't you? You any good at setting a broken ankle, Pop?"

"Oh, I could manage, I guess. Broke my arm down in the diggings once.
Had to set it myself. Twenty years ago, I think it was. I've been more
careful since then." He gave a laugh. It started as a normal laugh,
then broke to a senile giggle. Then his face was serious again. He
carried the new artifact closer to the man with the gun.

"You know, I was telling you.... The Martians were vegetarians. They
never made any weapons for hunting. They did know about explosives,
though."

"What's that thing?" The tall man, struggling with the buckles of his
breathing equipment, glanced at the object in Devere's hands. It looked
like badly corroded bronze, and consisted of a long tube with a large
bulb at one end.

"This? Oh, this is some kind of a tool I found. I think it was a
digging tool, used for breaking up rocks. They _did_ build canals, you
know.... As I was saying, they knew about explosives. This tool, for
instance. It worked by means of a small, shaped charge inside this
bulb here. The explosion was so well-focused that there was almost no
recoil. A high-energy shock wave was emitted from the barrel--very
effective at short range. But the most amazing thing about this tool is
that the chemical explosive is still potent after lying underground for
nearly a million years....

"Oh, by the way. There's nothing wrong with your sandcat's battery. It
was the motor I sabotaged."

Then Martin Devere pointed the ancient digging tool at the tall man and
blew him into two neat pieces.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Hermit of Mars never did get around to walking out to the space
ship and using his visitor's radio to tell Earth what had happened. He
really intended to, but he forgot. The ultimatum that was delivered to
the United Governments failed, of course, but no one knew exactly why
until the next Earth-Mars conjunction.

The United Governments was prevailed on by the World Television Service
to send out someone to interview the Hermit, if he were still alive.

That interview was unfortunate. It might have established Martin Devere
as the world hero that he was, and he might have been awarded some kind
of medal. As it went, his rude and insulting answers to the young man's
questions made him unpopular for years.

His last answer in the interview was the worst. The young man, already
sweating, looked in desperation at the green crystal vase that Martin
Devere insisted on holding in front of the television lens. (Back at
the Institute, a dozen faces were flushing red with indignation as
their owners realized what the old man had been holding back.)

"Tell me, Dr. Devere," the young man asked. "You seem--er--a very
modest man. Doesn't it make you the least bit proud to know that you've
saved the world?"

Martin Devere lowered his vase and gave the young man a puzzled look.

"You mean Earth? Tell me, why should I want to save _that_ world?"


END





End of Project Gutenberg's The Hermit of Mars, by Stephen Bartholomew

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HERMIT OF MARS ***

***** This file should be named 53048.txt or 53048.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/3/0/4/53048/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

